---
title: "Эйнштейн и Нобелевская премия"
date: 2020-10-10T18:15:00+03:00
lastmod: 2021-01-30T11:27:00+03:00
tags: ["science-people", "science-history"]
categories: ["сиянс"]
draft: false
slug: "einstein-nobel-prize"
---

По прошествии определённого времени архивы Нобелевского комитета
открываются. И становятся известны интересные подробности. Например,
почему так долго не получал премию Альберт Эйнштейн. И почему он её
получил не за теорию относительности.

<!--more-->

{{< toc >}}


## Краткое содержание статьи {#краткое-содержание-статьи}

Статья базируется на изысканиях Роберта Марка Фридмана.  Награждению
Эйнштейна противился [Альвар Гульстранд](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%93%D1%83%D0%BB%D1%8C%D1%81%D1%82%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%BD%D0%B4,%5F%D0%90%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%B2%D0%B0%D1%80), член Нобелевского комитета
(1911-1929) и его председатель (1922-1929)
(см. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1911/gullstrand/biographical/>). Своей
премией Эйнштейн обязан [Карлу Вильгельму Озеену](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%9E%D0%B7%D0%B5%D0%B5%D0%BD,%5F%D0%9A%D0%B0%D1%80%D0%BB%5F%D0%92%D0%B8%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%B3%D0%B5%D0%BB%D1%8C%D0%BC) и необходимостью
наградить премией Нильса Бора. Поскольку Бор являлся теоретиком, то
премии ему не полагалось. Озеен предложил наградить совместно Бора и
Эйнштейна: Бора за теоретические изыскания по квантовой теории, а
Эйнштейна за работы по исследованию фотоэффекта.

Впрочем, Озеен не любил Зоммерфельда. И ни ему, ни его ученикам
Нобелевскую премию не давали. До смерти Озеена в 1944 году. И в 1945
году премию наконец получил Паули. А Зоммерфельд так и не дождался.


## Einstein vs. the Nobel Prize {#einstein-vs-dot-the-nobel-prize}

Сдублирую текст статьи.

Ссылка на статью
[Einstein vs. the Nobel Prize](https://www.discovermagazine.com/the-sciences/einstein-vs-the-nobel-prize)

<details>
<summary>
Einstein vs. the Nobel Prize
</summary>
<p class="details">

When Albert Einstein listed the most important honors of his life, he
began with the German Physical Society's Max Planck Medal, named for a
physicist he revered. He went on from there to list the prizes and
honorary doctorate degrees awarded him in many nations. Conspicuously
absent was the plaudit with the highest profile and payout: the Nobel
Prize. But in context this omission isn't so surprising. The Nobel
nod---17 years after Einstein published his special theory of
relativity---came long after recognition by the physics world and even
the general public. Even more bizarre, the prize was awarded to
Einstein not for his relativity revolution, but for the comparatively
obscure discovery of the photoelectric effect. Why? After years of
sifting through letters and diaries of the Scandinavian archives,
science historian Robert Marc Friedman says it was an intentional snub
fueled by the biases of the day---a prejudice against pacifists, Jews,
and, most of all, theoretical physics.

In 1905, while working as a patent clerk in Switzerland, 26-year-old
Albert Einstein published five seminal papers on the nature of space,
light, and motion. One paper introduced the special theory of
relativity, which dramatically broke with Newton's universally
accepted description of how physics worked. Special relativity did
away with the notion of absolute space and time---Einstein said they
were instead "relative" to the observer's conditions---effectively
flipping the Newtonian model on its apple-bruised head. In 1915,
Einstein expanded the theory by incorporating gravity: it was not just
a force of attraction between bodies, he said, but the result of
distortions in space itself. This new, more robust version was called
the theory of general relativity.

Today, general relativity is celebrated as Einstein's most impressive
work. But as Friedman wrote in his 2001 book, The Politics of
Excellence, in post-War Germany Einstein was despised as a pacifist
Jew who renounced his German citizenship, went to meetings of radical
groups, and publicly supported socialism. His theories were dismissed
as "world-bluffing Jewish physics" by some prominent German
physicists, who claimed to practice "true" German science based on
observations of the natural world and hypotheses that could be tested
in a laboratory.

Luckily for Einstein, British astronomer Arthur Stanley Eddington
believed there was a way to test the general theory. If massive
objects curved space itself, as Einstein proposed, then they should
bend nearby rays of light, as well. During six minutes of a total
solar eclipse on May 29, 1919, Eddington measured the positions of
stars that appeared next to the blotted-out sun. Sure enough, they
followed the predictions of Einstein's general theory.

Eddington revealed the results of his eclipse experiment on November
6, and Einstein became a household name throughout the world
practically overnight---literally overnight in some places; the next
day, the London Times ran the headline, "Revolution in Science, New
Theory of the Universe." Within a month, the news traveled through the
American press; a New York Times headline declared, "Given the Speed,
Time Is Naught."

The nominations for Einstein that poured into the laps of the Nobel
Committee members as they were reviewing candidates for the 1920 prize
were not exactly well received. The committee did not want a
"political and intellectual radical, who---it was said---did not conduct
experiments, crowned as the pinnacle of physics," says Friedman. So
the 1920 prize was given to the Swiss Charles-Edouard Guillaume for
his ho-hum discovery of an inert nickel-steel alloy. When the
announcement was made, Friedman says the previously unknown Guillaume
"was as surprised as the rest of the world."

By the next year, "Einstein-mania" was in full bloom. During his first
trip to the United States he gave many public lectures on relativity,
and received the prestigious Barnard Medal from the National Academy
of Sciences. After one particularly crowded lecture at Princeton,
legend has it that Einstein said wryly to the chairman, "I never
realized that so many Americans were interested in tensor analysis."

As his quirky personality and untamed tresses gained more popularity
with the general public, his momentous theory gained more credibility
in the scientific community. In 1921, swarms of both theoreticians and
experimentalists again nominated Einstein for his work on
relativity. Reporters kept asking him, to his great annoyance, if this
would be the year that he received a Nobel Prize.

But 1921 was not the year, thanks to one stubborn senior member of the
prize committee, ophthalmologist Allvar Gullstrand. "Einstein must
never receive a Nobel Prize, even if the whole world demands it," said
Gullstrand, according to a Swedish mathematician's diary dug up by
Friedman. Gullstrand's arguments, however biased, convinced the rest
of the committee. In 1921, the Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded no
physics prize.

Two prizes were thus available in 1922. By this time, Einstein's
popularity was so great that many members of the committee feared for
their international reputations if they didn't recognize him in some
way. As in the previous two years, Einstein received many nominations
for his relativity theory. But this year there was one nomination---from
Carl Wilhelm Oseen---not for relativity, but for the discovery of the
law of the photoelectric effect. In another of his 1905 papers,
Einstein had proposed that light, which had been thought to act only
as a wave, sometimes acted as a particle---and laboratory experiments
conducted in 1916 showed he was right.

In his exhaustive research, Friedman realized that Oseen lobbied the
committee to recognize the photoelectric effect not as a "theory," but
as a fundamental "law" of nature–not because he cared about
recognizing Einstein, but because he had another theoretical physicist
in mind for that second available prize: Niels Bohr. Bohr had proposed
a new quantum theory of the atom that Oseen felt was "the most
beautiful of all the beautiful" ideas in recent theoretical
physics. In his report to the committee, Oseen exaggerated the close
bond between Einstein's proven law of nature and Bohr's new atom. "In
one brilliant stroke," Friedman says, "he saw how to meet the
objections against both Einstein and Bohr."

The committee was indeed won over. On November 10, 1922, they gave the
1922 prize to Bohr and the delayed 1921 prize to Einstein, "especially
for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect." Einstein,
en route to Japan (and perhaps huffy after the committee's long delay)
did not attend the official ceremony. According to Friedman, Einstein
didn't care much about the medal, anyway, though he did care about the
money. As the German mark decreased in value after the war, Einstein
needed a hard foreign currency for alimony payments to his
ex-wife. Moreover, under the terms of his 1919 divorce settlement, she
was already entitled to all the money "from an eventual Nobel Prize."
Bruce Hunt, an Einstein historian at the University of Texas at
Austin, says that calling attention to these financial arrangements
"brings out the fact that Einstein was a much more worldly and savvy
man than his later public image would suggest."

Of course, Einstein isn't the only player who emerges as being not
quite angelic. "The decisions of the Nobel Committees are often
treated by the press and public as the voice of god," Hunt says. But
Friedman's research brought to light "how political the deliberations
of the Nobel Committees sometimes were---and presumably still are."
</p>
</details>


## Backlinks {#backlinks}


### [Пенроуз - нобелиат]({{< relref "2020-10-10-penrose-nobeliat" >}}) {#пенроуз-нобелиат}

P.S. По этому поводу вспоминается Эйнштейн, которому тоже долго не давали Нобелевскую премию (см. [Einstein vs. the Nobel Prize]({{< relref "2020-10-10-einstein-nobel-prize" >}})).
